libxm
=====

A small XM (Fasttracker II Extended Module) player library. Main
features:

* Small and hackable: many features can be disabled at compile-time, or are
  optimized out by the compiler if not used. It is easy to bundle libxm in your
  game, demo, intro, etc.

* Fairly portable. Minimal dependencies (just libm). No memory allocations.
  Big-endian compatible (tested on s390x).

* Reasonable accuracy compared to Fasttracker 2. Deviations from FT2 playback,
  that aren't obviously bugs in FT2, are also libxm bugs. If you have a module
  that plays incorrectly, please test it in FT2/FT2clone and open an issue!

* Can load most XM/MOD files, however playback accuracy of non-XM is
  best-effort.

* Timing functions for synchronising against specific instruments,
  samples or channels.

* Samples can be loaded and altered at run-time, making it possible to
  use libxm with softsynths or other real-time signal processors.

Written in C23 and released under the WTFPL license, version 2.

Building
========

* Build the library:

  ~~~
  cmake -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=RelWithDebInfo -Bbuild -Ssrc
  make -C build
  ~~~

* Build a specific example:

  ~~~
  cmake -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=RelWithDebInfo -Bbuild-FOO -Sexamples/FOO
  make -C build-FOO
  ~~~

* To build a shared library and link dynamically, use
  `cmake -DBUILD_SHARED_LIBS=ON`.

* To see a list of build options, use `cmake -L` or `cmake-gui`.

* To use libxm in your program, put these lines in the `CMakeLists.txt` of your  project, then `#include <xm.h>`:

  ~~~
  add_subdirectory(/path/to/libxm/src libxm_build)
  target_link_libraries(my_stuff PRIVATE xm)
  ~~~


Size
====

`libxmtoau` can be compiled (with all playback features enabled) and
[crushed](https://gitlab.com/artefact2/xzcrush) to about **3889 bytes** (x86_64-linux-gnu).

~~~
cmake -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=MinSizeRel -DXM_VERBOSE=OFF -DXM_LIBXM_DELTA_SAMPLES=OFF -DXM_LINEAR_INTERPOLATION=OFF -DXM_RAMPING=OFF -DXM_STRINGS=OFF -DXM_TIMING_FUNCTIONS=OFF -DXM_MUTING_FUNCTIONS=OFF -DXM_SAMPLE_TYPE=float -Bbuild-libxmize -Sexamples/libxmize
make -C build-libxmize libxmtoau
strip -R .eh_frame_hdr -R .eh_frame build-libxmize/libxmtoau
xzcrush build-libxmize/libxmtoau
~~~

If you are using libxm to play a single module (like in a demo/intro), disable
features as suggested by `libxmize --analyze` to save a few more bytes.

For example, `libxmize --analyze mindrmr.xm` suggests `-DXM_DISABLED_EFFECTS=0xFFFFD9FBFFDE68E1 -DXM_DISABLED_VOLUME_EFFECTS=0x0CC0 -DXM_DISABLED_FEATURES=0xFFFFFFFFFFF7EE04 -DXM_PANNING_TYPE=8`. We only want to play the module once and quit, so we can use `-DXM_LOOPING_TYPE=1`. Compiling with these new flags, the resulting binary is crushed to **2717 bytes**.

Examples
========

* [libxm.js](https://artefact2.github.io/libxm.js/) is a very simple
  XM player/visualiser that runs in a browser (emscripten port).

* `xmgl` is a simple music visualiser that uses OpenGL, GLFW and JACK for very
  precise audio synchronisation. See a demo here:
  <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SR-fSa7J698>

* `xmprocdemo`: a simple non-interactive demo that plays back a single module
  with procedurally generated samples. Somewhat optimized for size. ([Dream
  Candy](https://modarchive.org/module.php?178565) by Drozerix, public domain.
  Thank you Drozerix for the great music!)

* `libxmize` converts a `.xm` module to the libxm format. It is highly
  non-portable and is meant for static linking and sizecoding (loading code is
  much shorter and libxm format compresses better).

* `libxmtoau` reads standard input (a file generated by `libxmize`) and
  writes a .AU file to standard output. Somewhat optimized for size, see [size
  section](#Size) above. You can test it with, for example,
  `libxmize file.xm | libxmtoau | mpv -`.

Here are some interesting modules, most showcase unusual or advanced
tracking techniques (and thus are a good indicator of a player's
accuracy):

* [Cerror - Expatarimental](https://artefact2.github.io/libxm.js/#136603)
* [Lamb - Among the stars](https://artefact2.github.io/libxm.js/#165819)
* [Raina - Cyberculosis](https://artefact2.github.io/libxm.js/#165308)
* [Raina - Slumberjack](https://artefact2.github.io/libxm.js/#148721)
* [Strobe - One for all](https://artefact2.github.io/libxm.js/#161246)
* [Strobe - Paralysicical death](https://artefact2.github.io/libxm.js/#65817)

Known inaccuracies
==================

* E8y panning effect is supported, FT2 has no support for this command
* Glissando control (E3y) with Amiga frequencies is not yet supported
* Arpeggios after pitch slides with Amiga frequencies are subtly incorrect
* Amiga filter toggle (E0y) is not supported, and is unlikely to be
* Invert loop / funk repeat (EFy) is not supported, and is unlikely to be
* Period wraparound after a long slide down (with eg, 2xx) is not accurate
* Global volume effects (Gxx/Hxy) are subtly incorrect
* Tone portamento (3xx/Mx) does not "lock" its direction
* Arpeggio (0xy) does not reset vibrato offset (Vy) when Spd=1
* (MOD only) Sample offset (9xx) beyond sample loop end will cut the note
  * Can be manually toggled with `FEATURE_ACCURATE_SAMPLE_OFFSET_EFFECT`

To report more, please [open an issue](../../issues?q=is%3Aissue%20state%3Aopen%20label%3Abug).

Tests
=====

Some test XM files are in the `tests` directory.

A few tests can be automatically run (failing tests marked XXX are not
regressions, but bugs/inaccuracies that have yet to be fixed):

~~~
cmake -Bbuild-tests -Stests
make -C build-tests all test
~~~

Other tests require manual checking, see the table below.

~~~
Test                            | Status         | Tested against         | Extras
--------------------------------+----------------+------------------------+------------------------------------------------
autovibrato-triggers.xm         | MOSTLY         | FT2clone 1.94          | Should sound identical. Use a spectrogram as it is very hard to hear subtle changes in pitch.
pattern-loop-quirk.xm           | PASS           | MilkyTracker           | Should play the same notes at the same time.
pos_jump.xm                     | PASS           | Milkytracker, OpenMPT  | Only one beep should be heard.
ramping.xm                      | PASS           | FT2clone 1.94          | If XM_RAMPING is ON, output should be mostly frame for frame identical.
waveform-control-autovibrato.xm | PASS           | FT2clone 1.94          | Should sound identical. Patterns 0 and 1 should also sound identical. Use a spectrogram as it is very hard to hear subtle changes in pitch.
waveform-control-combo.xm       | PASS           | FT2clone 1.94          | Should sound identical.
waveform-control-tremolo.xm     | PASS           | FT2clone 1.94          | Should sound identical.
waveform-control-vibrato.xm     | PASS           | FT2clone 1.94          | Should sound identical.
~~~

Thanks
======

Thanks to:

* Thunder <kurttt@sfu.ca>, for writing the `modfil10.txt` file;

* Matti "ccr" Hamalainen <ccr@tnsp.org>, for writing the `xm-form.txt`
  file;

* Mr.H of Triton and Guru and Alfred of Sahara Surfers, for writing
  the specification of XM 1.04 files;

* All the MilkyTracker contributors, for the [thorough
  documentation](http://www.milkytracker.org/docs/manual/MilkyTracker.html#effects)
  of effects;

* Vladimir Kameñar, for writing `The Unofficial XM File Format Specification`;

* All the people that helped on `#milkytracker` IRC;

* All the
  [libxm](https://github.com/Artefact2/libxm/graphs/contributors)
  contributors.
